Then he starts to think about Maria, and how lovely she is, and how good the past night had been. He begins to wonder whether it was all a dream, since such things simply don't happen except in dreams. He's had plenty of dreams like that, though – with movie stars like Gretta Garbo.
To make sure it wasn't a dream, he touches Maria. That gets a smile. Nope, wasn't a dream.Speaking in broken sentences, he asks Robert Jordan about the operation, which the start to discuss, sitting on a log in front of El Sordo's cave. Maria is told to go away, and leaves with Joaquin.
El Sordo, who got the whiskey in La Granja, also got some information there. There's a lot of movement throughout the territory. He believes the Republicans are preparing something, and the fascists know and are preparing as well. He wants to blow up the bridge right away, but, as we know, that won't work.
Sordo doesn't like the way all this looks, but agrees to help. His group of eight will take one of the two posts.
Together, the two bands make seventeen. Horses would be needed for a secure retreat, but there are only nine between the two groups. It's doubtful they'll be able to get more, Sordo says.
After talking a bit about supplies, El Sordo agrees to stop by that night and talk more about plans.
Pilar strikes up a conversation with El Sordo, and at that point he drops out of his pidgin Spanish. She wants to know where they should go after the attack; the fascists will most definitely clean up afterwards.
El Sordo suggests Gredos, which will be safest, though it will be very hard to get there. Pilar wants to go into the Republic. When Robert Jordan suggests they would be much more useful in Gredos, both Pilar and El Sordo grow sullen.
They turn to discussing Kashkin and Pilar asks whether Robert Jordan's nerves are better than his (which wouldn't be saying much, from what we know). He affirms they are.
At this point, Robert Jordan spills the beans about what actually happened to Kashkin: he killed him (gasp!). Kashkin had been too badly wounded after a train raid to be moved.
When Jordan suggests that Pilar go to Gredos again, she lets loose a torrent of obscenities. How dare he tell them where they will die?